Final GSoC report cbouy (#151)
MDAnalysis/MDAnalysis.github.io: _posts/2020-08-24-gsoc-report-cbouy.md

---
layout: post
title: "GSoC Report: From RDKit to the Universe and back 🚀"
---

With the end of the summer comes the end of my awesome Google Summer of Code adventure with the MDAnalysis team. It's also the occasion for me to report on the code I've implemented, the things I've learned and the challenges I've faced.

> ## Summary of the project

Reviewer: One paragraph of motivation would be good. *Why* are you doing this. What were we able to do before, what was missing, what can we do now? You can recycle from your proposal.

> ---

Reviewer: I don't think these `---` are needed.

> The goal of my project, "[From RDKit to the Universe and back][project-url]", was to provide interoperability between MDAnalysis and RDKit. *i.e.* to be able to:

Reviewer: link to RDKit

> * Read an RDKit molecule and create an MDAnalysis `Universe` with it,

Reviewer: Link Universe, AtomGroup to our docs.

  This was the first part of the project and it helped me get acquainted with MDAnalysis as I had never used it before GSoC. The goal here was to be able to "parse" an RDKit molecule and build an MDAnalysis Universe from it.  
  It was also the occasion for me to start interfacing MDAnalysis with RDKit as I got to implement a new classmethod for the Universe, the `Universe.from_smiles` method which allows us to build a Universe from a SMILES string, but also to add atom selection based on aromaticity.  
  At the end of this first PR, I was familiar with the different core objects that compose the Universe as well as writing tests with pytest and documentation with sphinx.

* **Converting an MDAnalysis universe to RDKit**: [#2775](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/pull/2775)  
  The second goal of the project was to be able to convert an MDAnalysis AtomGroup to an RDKit molecule, allowing users to analyse MD trajectories in RDKit. While this should be trivial once we know how to do the opposite operation, it was actually a real challenge to get a molecule with the correct bond order and charges out of it.  

>   As you may know, most MD topology file formats don't keep track of bond orders and formal charges so we have to find a way to infer this information from what we have. In our case, we require all hydrogen atoms to be explicit in the topology file, as well as elements and bonds (although these two can be guessed). Then the bond orders and formal charges are inferred based on atomic valencies and the number of unpaired electrons, followed by a standardization step of functionnal groups and conjugated systems. This last step is needed because the algorithm implemented to guess bond orders and charges is dependant on the order in which atoms are read.  

Reviewer 2: I really think we should emphasize just how hard of a problem this is, is there anything that could be added here to detail the issue? maybe some images showing how it went wrong and how your new code fixes things?

>   As you may know, most MD topology file formats don't keep track of bond orders and formal charges so we have to find a way to infer this information from what we have. In our case, we require all hydrogen atoms to be explicit in the topology file, as well as elements and bonds (although these two can be guessed). Then the bond orders and formal charges are inferred based on atomic valencies and the number of unpaired electrons, followed by a standardization step of functionnal groups and conjugated systems. This last step is needed because the algorithm implemented to guess bond orders and charges is dependant on the order in which atoms are read.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  As you may know, most MD topology file formats don't keep track of bond orders and formal charges so we have to find a way to infer this information from what we have. In our case, we require all hydrogen atoms to be explicit in the topology file, as well as elements and bonds (although these two can be guessed). Then the bond orders and formal charges are inferred based on atomic valencies and the number of unpaired electrons, followed by a standardization step of functional groups and conjugated systems. This last step is needed because the algorithm implemented to guess bond orders and charges is dependent on the order in which atoms are read.  
```

  This took a more time than originally planned in the project timeline but was well worth it.

### In progress

> * **SMARTS selection**: [#2883](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/mdanalysis/pull/2883/files/55691558811a1091bd8ff7a1868bbde140f63d72)  

Reviewer 2: Pretty sure we can get this merged super quick ;)

  While developing the RDKitConverter, some interesting points were made about the current API used to convert AtomGroups, *i.e.* `u.atoms.convert_to("RDKIT")`. This method is case sensitive, it doesn't allow to pass arguments to the converter class, and it requires users to read the documentation to know which converters are available. This PR corrects the two first points and adds the possibility to either use the previous syntax or tab-completion to find the available converters *i.e.* `u.atoms.convert_to.rdkit()`.  
  This was inspired by pandas `df.plot(kind="scatter", ...)` which is also accessible as `df.plot.scatter(...)`.  
  Since this is an API change, more discussion with core developers is needed for now.

### Left to do

* Guessers for aromaticity and Gasteiger charges through RDKit
* Tutorial on the reader/converter and wrapped RDKit functionalities in the UserGuide. This will make it easier for users to know about the features I implemented and how to use them properly, rather than searching for every single feature in the documentation.
* Documentation on the RDKit format in the UserGuide: [#69](https://github.com/MDAnalysis/UserGuide/pull/69)

> 

Reviewer: Can you include a section here that demoes some of the capabilities? You had great blog posts doing that. Show some images here. Give readers a taste of what they can get.
